.TH ecppc 1 "2006\-07\-23" Tntnet "Tntnet users guide"
.SH NAME
.PP
ecppc \- compiler for ecpp(7)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\fB\fCecppc\fR [\fB\fC\-bhszvtM\fR] [\fB\fC\-s\-\fR] [\fB\fC\-o\fR \fIfilename\fP]  [\fB\fC\-n\fR \fIname\fP] [\fB\fC\-m\fR \fImimetype\fP] [\fB\fC\-\-mimetypes\fR \fIfilename\fP] [\fB\fC\-I\fR \fIdir\fP] [\fB\fC\-l\fR \fIlog\-category\fP] \fIfilename\fP

.PP
\fB\fCecppc\fR \fB\fC\-bb\fR \fIfilename\fP ...

.PP
\fB\fCecppc\fR [\fB\fCOPTION\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fB\fCecppc\fR is the compiler for the ecpp\-language. \fB\fCecpp\fR is a template language,
which lets the user embed C++\-code  into HTML  for  use  in  tntnet(8).
\fB\fCecppc\fR generates a C++\-class from a ecpp template. It can also compile binary
data into a C++\-class, which makes it possible to integrate them in a tntnet
application.

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\fB\fC\-b\fR
  This enables binary\-mode. Ecppc does not look for ecpp\-tags, but creates a
  class, which just copies the data

.PP
\fB\fC\-bb\fR
  This enables multi\-binary\-mode. Every binary\-file has some overhead, when
  packed into a tntnet\-application. This overhead can be quite significant, when
  binary\-files are small, like small icons in a web application. To reduce this
  overhead, multiple binaries can be packed into a single class, which removes
  the per\-binary overhead completely.

.PP
When the component is called, it uses the path\-info\-parameter
  (request.getPathInfo()) from the request, to decide, which binary to send. If
  no filename matches the path\-info, processing is declined. The binaries need
  not be of same mime\-type, since the mime\-type is looked automatically from the
  mime\-database by file\- extension of the source\-file.

.PP
\fB\fC\-i\fR \fIfilename\fP
  In multi binary mode (option \fB\fC\-bb\fR) filenames can be read from the file
  specified with this option. This can be useful when the command line gets too
  long or just for convenience.

.PP
\fB\fC\-I\fR \fIdir\fP
  Search include\-files in directory. This option can be passed multiple times.
  All specified directories are searched in turn for include\-files.

.PP
\fB\fC\-l\fR \fIlog\-category\fP
  Set log category. Default is \fIcomponent.componentname\fP\&.

.PP
\fB\fC\-L\fR
  Disable generation of #line\-directives

.PP
\fB\fC\-m\fR \fImimetype\fP
  Set mimetype of output. This is the mimetype, sent by the component to the
  browser in the Content\-Type\- header. Without this parameter the mimetype is
  looked up from the mime\-database of your system using the file\-extension of
  the source\-file.

.PP
\fB\fC\-\-mimetypes\fR \fIfile\fP
  Read mimetypes from file (default: /etc/mime.types).

.PP
\fB\fC\-M\fR
  This disables normal processing and prints just the ecpp\-dependencies from
  this component. The output can be included into a Makefile. Ecpp\-dependencies
  are introduces by the <%include>\-tag.

.PP
\fB\fC\-C, \-\-cmake\fR
  Prints ecpp dependencies in a syntax, which \fB\fCcmake\fR understands.

.PP
\fB\fC\-n\fR \fIname\fP
  Set the name of the component. Normally this is derived from the
  source\-file\-name by removing the path and .ecpp\-extension.

.PP
\fB\fC\-o\fR \fIfilename\fP
  Write the generated file to the specified file instead of deriving the
  filename from the source\-file\-name.  The outputfilename is normally the
  source\-file where the extension is replaced by .cpp.

.PP
\fB\fC\-p\fR
  Keep path name when deriving name of component from input file name.

.PP
\fB\fC\-s\fR
  Generate singleton. Normally ecppc decides automatically, if the template is
  suitable for a singleton.  This option force ecppc to generate a singleton.

.PP
\fB\fC\-s\-\fR
  Do not generate a singleton.

.PP
\fB\fC\-v\fR
  Enable verbose mode. This prints additional information about the processing
  on the standard\-output.

.PP
\fB\fC\-z\fR
  Compress the data in the component. Compressed data is automatically
  decopressed on first use. This reduces the code\-size, but slightly slows down
  the first call of the component.

.PP
\fB\fC\-h, \-\-help\fR
  display this information

.PP
\fB\fC\-V, \-\-version\fR
  display program version

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
This manual page was written by Tommi Mäkitalo 
\[la]tommi@tntnet.org\[ra]\&.

.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
tntnet(8), ecpp(7)
