.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Tommi Maekitalo
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.TH tntnet.properties 7 2006-08-13 "Tntnet" "Tntnet users guide"
.
\" =====================================================================
.SH NAME
\" =====================================================================
.
tntnet.properties \- configuration-file for tntnet (8)
.
\" =====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
\" =====================================================================
tntnet(8) uses cxxtools for logging and is configured in the
configuration-file \fBtntnet.properties\fP.
.PP
Because cxxtools is a meta-logging-library, which can be compiled to
use different logging-libraries, the content of \fBtntnet.properties\fP
is dependend of the underlying logging-library.
Cxxtool has a built-in logging-library as default, which is documented
here.

.SS format
The format of tntnet.properties is line-based.
A line consists of a variable-name followed by a equals-symbol and a value.
Lines, which does not follow this format and lines, which start with a
hash (#), are ignored.
It is recomended to prefix non-empty comments with a hash to make clear,
that it is a comment.

.SS level
The logging-library has 5 levels for logging: \fIfatal\fP, \fIerror\fP,
\fIwarn\fP, \fIinfo\fP and \fIdebug\fP.
\fIFatal\fP has the highers priority and "debug" the lowest.

.SS category
Each log-message has a category.
Categories are hierarchical.
Names of subcategories are devided by a dot.

.SS log-message
Each log-message has a level and a category.
If the level of the message is higher or equal to the level of the
category, the message is logged.
To assign a level to a category put a line with the word "logger", a dot,
the category, the symbol "=" and the category into tntnet.properties.
Only the first letter of the value is checked and case is ignored,
so e.g. info can be specified with \fIINFO\fP, \fIinfo\fP, \fII\fP or
even \fIixxxx\fP.
If no level is specified for the current category, the upper category is
checked.
If nothing is found, the default level is used. The default level
is specified by the variable "\fIrootLogger\fP".
If no \fIrootLogger\fP is specified, the level error is used.

.SS destination
If nothing else is specified, log-messages are printed to
standard-output.
To redirect output to a file, specify the filename with the variable
\fIfile\fP.
.PP
The cxxtools-logger can limit the size of the log-file by rolling
log-files.
If the limit is reached, the current file is renamed by appending ".1"
to it.
If there is already a file with that name, this file is renamed to "*.2"
and so on, until the maximum backupfile limit is reached.
The oldest file is deleted then.
To specify the maximum file size, set the variable \fImaxfilesize\fP.
The value specified here can be postfixed with 'k' or 'M' to specify
kBytes or MBytes.
The maximum fileindex backed up is set with \fImaxbackupindex\fP.
.PP
Log-messages can be sent to another host in the network with udp.
This is done by specifying a hostname and a port with the variable
\fIhost\fP.
The value must be a hostname, followed by a ':' and a port.
Each log-message is sent in a single udp-message.
.
\" =====================================================================
.SH EXAMPLES
\" =====================================================================
.
.SS logging to standard-output:
.RS
rootLogger=INFO
.br
logger.tntnet=WARN
.br
.RE
.
.SS logging to a file with rolling file and a background-flusher:
.RS
rootLogger=INFO
.br
logger.tntnet=WARN
.br
file=tntnet.log
.br
maxfilesize=1MB
.br
maxbackupindex=10
.br
.RE
.
.SS logging to another host
.RS
rootLogger=INFO
.br
logger.tntnet=WARN
.br
host=pluto.tntnet.org:1234
.br
.RE
.
\" =====================================================================
.SH AUTHOR
\" =====================================================================
.
This manual page was written by Tommi M\[:a]kitalo <tommi@tntnet.org>.
.
\" =====================================================================
.SH SEE ALSO
\" =====================================================================
.
.BR tntnet (8)
