.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Tommi Maekitalo
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.TH ecppl 1 2006-08-26 "Tntnet" "Tntnet users guide"
.SH NAME
ecppl \- language-extractor for ecpp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ecppl
.RB [ \-I
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-ln ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output-filename ]
.RB ecpp-filename

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ecppl
is the language-extractor for ecpp.
Ecpp - the template-language used with tntnet - supports internationalized
applications.
In ecpp-templates a tag \fI<i18n>\fP changes the meaning of curly braces.
A phrase, which is enclosed in curly braces, can be translated.
At runtime the phrase is looked up in a language-library.
This mode can be quit with the tag \fI</i18n>\fP.
Phrases must not have newlines or tabs.
.PP
Every phrase, which is marked as translatable, is extracted with ecppl
and written to standard output or to a specified output-filename line by line.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\-I dir"
Search include-files in directory.
This option can be passed multiple times.
All specified directories are searched in turn for include-files.
.IP "\-l"
Extract language-phrases (the default)
.IP "\-n"
Extract non-language-phrases
.IP "\-o filename"
Specify output filename

.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Tommi M\[:a]kitalo <tommi@tntnet.org>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tntnet (1),
.BR ecpp (7),
.BR ecppll (1).
