.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Tommi Maekitalo
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.TH ecppll 1 2006-08-26 "Tntnet" "Tntnet users guide"
.SH NAME
ecppll \- language-linker for ecpp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ecppll
.RB [ \-I
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-F ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output-filename ]
.RB ecpp-filename
.RB [ translated-data ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ecppll
is the language-linker for ecpp.
This program combines the data of a ecpp-file with translated phrases from a
source-file and generates a data-file used by tntnet to look up translated
data.
The translated data file must contain the original phrase and the translated
version separated by tab line by line.
.PP
To generate a language file the generated files of all components of a
component-library must be zipped. The resulting zip-file must have the same
basename as the component-library and the language-code as the extension.
Tntnet tries to find the langage library by first appending the value of
the query parameter LANG to the name of the componentlibrary. If the file
is not found, the environment-variable LANG is used. If that is neither found,
the default data from the original component is used.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\-F"
Fail on warning.
If a phrase is not found in the language-data or in language-data is a phrase
not used it the ecpp-file, ecppll warns about it to standard output.
If this flag is set, ecppll returns a non-zero return-code.
.IP "\-I dir"
Search include-files in directory.
This option can be passed multiple times.
All specified directories are searched in turn for include-files.
.IP "\-o filename"
Specify output filename

.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Tommi M\[:a]kitalo <tommi@tntnet.org>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tntnet (1),
.BR ecpp (7),
.BR ecppl (1)
