.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH tntnet 8 "July 23, 2006" "Tntnet" "Tntnet users guide"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
tntnet \- web application server for c++
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY tntnet
.OP -c file
.OP --logall
.YS
.SY tntnet
-C
.OP -q query-string
.RI [ componentId
.IR .\|.\|. ]
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B tntnet
command.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
.B tntnet
is a web server that can generate dynamic content via precompiled C++
modules.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.IP "-c file"
Use
.I file
as the configuration file.  If the
.B -c
is omitted, the first nonoption argument is used as the config file.
.IP "--logall"
Initialize logging earlier. Normally logging is initialized after starting the
listeners and changing user so that logfiles are created with the right owner.
For debugging reasons this option forces to do that earlier.
.IP "-C"
Call components and print the result to stdout instead of starting tntnet as
a webserver
.IP "-q query-string"
In -C mode pass this query string to the component. The option may be repeated
multiple times to pass name-value-pairs easily.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLE
.EX
tntnet -C -q arg1=35 -q arg2=7 -q op=/ calc@calc
.EE
calls the component calc@calc with query parameters and prints the result to
stdout.
.SH FILES
.B /etc/tntnet/tntnet.conf
The default configuration file.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TNTNET_CONF
This is checked for the configuration file name if it is not specified
on the command line.
.SH AUTHOR
tntnet was written by Tommi M\[:a]kitalo <tommi@tntnet.org>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Kari Pahula <kaol@debian.org>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tntnet-config (1),
.BR ecpp (7),
.BR ecppc (1),
.BR ecppl (1),
.BR ecppll (1),
.BR tntnet.conf (7),
.BR tntnet.properties (7).
.br
More documentation can be found in
.BR /usr/share/doc/tntnet-doc/ .
