.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH TNTNET-CONFIG 1 "July  3, 2006"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
tntnet-config \- output compiler flags for tntnet usage
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tntnet-config
.RB [ --libs ]
.RB [ --cxxflags ]
.RB [ --config [ =app ]]
.RB [ --makefile [ =app ]]
.RB [ --project=app ]
.RB [ --autoproject=app ]
.RB [ --help ]
.RB [ --version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B tntnet-config
command.
.SH OPTIONS
This program's options start with two dashes (`-').
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.B --libs
Output linker flags.
.TP
.B --cxxflags
Output C++ preprocessor and compiler flags.
.TP
.BR --config [ =app ]
Print default configuration file.
.TP
.BR --makefile [ =app ]
Print a simple makefile for an ecpp project.
.TP
.BI --project= app
Create a simple
.B ecpp
project directory.
.TP
.BI --autoproject= app
Create a autotools based
.B ecpp
project.
.TP
.B --help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version of program.
.SH AUTHOR
tntnet was written by Tommi M\[:a]kitalo <tommi@tntnet.org>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Kari Pahula <kaol@debian.org>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tntnet (8),
.BR ecppc (1),
.BR ecppl (1),
.BR ecppll (1).
.br
More documentation can be found in
.BR /usr/share/doc/tntnet-doc/ .
